We have Jillian Kraft.
NOTE CONF
So you feel.
So.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
Welcome.
NOTE CONF
I'm really sorry for the delay, I'm afraid.
No.
NOTE CONF
Internet also means no lecture recording and no wool club.
All right, so we'll just have the slides today.
NOTE CONF
I think I'll make I can make an old lecture
recording available.
NOTE CONF
Uh, just taking the one from last year.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So today is about, uh, the perceptron.
So what is the perceptron?
NOTE CONF
It's a very simple neural network architecture.
So so far we've only talked about, um, cognitive models
NOTE CONF
in an abstract sense as something that's a computational simulation
of, of human behaviour and is something that helps you
NOTE CONF
understand that behaviour and hopefully generate research hypotheses or test
research hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Now we're actually going to get down to the nitty
gritty and talk about a particular modelling framework in in
NOTE CONF
more detail.
And this is neural networks.
NOTE CONF
We'll start really simple with the simplest possible architectures called
the perceptron which is essentially just modelling a single neurone.
NOTE CONF
And then tomorrow we'll we'll look at larger assemblies of
these neurones in something that's called a multi-layer perceptron.
NOTE CONF
And in particular we're also going to talk about training.
How do we actually get these models to learn anything
NOTE CONF
from from data.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Last time we talked about radical empiricism as a way
of of modelling.
NOTE CONF
Everything is learning from data.
And so these are the models that actually are able
NOTE CONF
to do that.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so quick overview.
Uh, talk about neural networks as a biological, not a
NOTE CONF
biological model.
More like a metaphor.
NOTE CONF
Then I'll talk about the perceptron and how they can
use as classifiers.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll talk about learning.
And in particular, the perceptron learning rule probably will run
NOTE CONF
out of time because we started late.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So if you think about a neurone then it has
roughly this is obviously just a caricature, but it has
NOTE CONF
roughly the structure.
You have a neurone here with the nucleus and the
NOTE CONF
cell body.
Then you have dendrites which are connections to other neurones.
NOTE CONF
And this is where the neurone gets its input.
And you have an axon, uh, which is where the
NOTE CONF
neurone is connected to other neurones.
And at the axon terminal it potentially generates an output.
NOTE CONF
So input output in our model will just be numbers
In in biology, they're electrical currents and they're generated through
NOTE CONF
electrochemistry.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And then there's a lot of other parts like the
Schwann cells and node of Ranvier and so on.
NOTE CONF
The actual biological neurone is a lot more complicated still.
And we're not even going to model all of these
NOTE CONF
things on the picture.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So that's what I meant when I said, this is
not a model of a biological neurone.
NOTE CONF
This is really a computational device that uses a neurone
as a metaphor and has a loose relationship to it.
NOTE CONF
But the important thing to note is that the neurone
takes an input, it combines those, and once the input
NOTE CONF
reaches a certain threshold, it produces an output.
It fires and the inputs can be excitatory.
NOTE CONF
So increase the output or inhibitory i.e. they reduce the
output.
NOTE CONF
And the important thing is what happens when the axons
and the dendrites connect between two neurones?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the dendrite is the input and the axon is
NOTE CONF
the output.
We have a so-called synapse.
NOTE CONF
And the synapse basically regulates the firing.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it waits until a certain amount of input has
arrived and then it generates an output.
NOTE CONF
And this is called firing.
And this is in biological terms there's a chemical process.
NOTE CONF
But here we'll just model it using a function which
we'll call a threshold function or an output function activation
NOTE CONF
function sometimes.
So that is the only biology in my part of
NOTE CONF
the course.
Matthias will have a lot more to say in his
NOTE CONF
part.
But here we're just using the neurone as a metaphor.
NOTE CONF
So taking the inputs and here introducing a little bit
of notation already, let's call the inputs x1, x2, x3
NOTE CONF
and so on.
And as I said these are numbers real numbers in
NOTE CONF
the journal case and then the strength of the connection.
So the the synapses at the input.
NOTE CONF
Here at the dendrites we will call these weights.
And each input comes with a weight w1, w2, w3
NOTE CONF
and so on.
And then what the neurone does it computes an output
NOTE CONF
function, which in our case is just a weighted sum.
And then what the synapse does, it decides to either
NOTE CONF
fire or not.
And this will just model through a simple threshold function.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a single neurone.
And a single neurone is not very powerful.
NOTE CONF
There's not that much we can do, but they're the
basic units of information processing that we'll assume.
NOTE CONF
And if we want to be precise in computational terms,
we'll talk about units.
NOTE CONF
We don't talk about neurones because they're not neurones.
They're not even proper models of neurones Even though people
NOTE CONF
often confused or conflate the two.
So in the neural network literature, as the name implies,
NOTE CONF
people talk about neurones, but in fact they're just simple
computational units.
NOTE CONF
And in biological networks, in the cortex, for example, these
neurones, they're organised in terms of layers.
NOTE CONF
So they're not just randomly distributed but they're organised in
a certain way, uh, typically in terms of layers.
NOTE CONF
And this is something that we can model as well
in our artificial neural networks.
NOTE CONF
But something is still missing, right.
So we have these units and that's all great.
NOTE CONF
But of course we need connections as well to get
a network.
NOTE CONF
At this point this is just a bunch of nodes.
So we're interested in the connections and in the neural
NOTE CONF
network literature, in almost all cases we assume what's called
a fully connected network.
NOTE CONF
So we have a single unit here let's say in
layer two.
NOTE CONF
And this is connected to all the units in layer
three and in layer one.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So this is a feed forward network in the sense
NOTE CONF
that the connections are only in one direction from top
to bottom, layer one to layer two, from layer two
NOTE CONF
to layer three.
And it's fully connected in that all these units in
NOTE CONF
this layer are connected to all those units in that
layer.
NOTE CONF
So here I'm just drawing the connections of a single
unit.
NOTE CONF
But in in in the general case there's lots of
units because we're lots of connections because we're assuming it's
NOTE CONF
fully connected.
And these are often just represented as lines.
NOTE CONF
So the units are represented as little circles and the
connections are the lines.
NOTE CONF
Why are the connections important.
Because they are associated with weights.
NOTE CONF
And the weights are things that we can actually adjust.
They're essentially the parameters of the model.
NOTE CONF
We can learn the weights and all the knowledge in
some sense is in the weights, because that's the only
NOTE CONF
thing that's learned in the network, right?
So these arrows, they symbolise the connections.
NOTE CONF
And each connection is associated with a weight with the
number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But let's go back to the simple case of a
NOTE CONF
single unit.
So this idea of having a simple computational unit called
NOTE CONF
the perceptron is actually quite old, goes back to the
50s.
NOTE CONF
And it's the simplest kind of artificial neural network.
And people realised quite early on in, in the 60s
NOTE CONF
that it's quite limited.
And there's a lot of things you can't do.
NOTE CONF
And we'll talk about that in more detail later in
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the, the, the kind of diagram that
NOTE CONF
we'll see also, for example, in the tutorial next week.
And this is how to read this.
NOTE CONF
So we have our inputs here x.
The inputs we just assume our numbers.
NOTE CONF
And that also means that whatever we want to input,
be it text, images, sounds, any sort of perception that
NOTE CONF
goes into the network has to be numbers, right?
So everything is a vector.
NOTE CONF
Um, images are represented as vectors.
Words are represented as vectors through uh, specific encodings called
NOTE CONF
embeddings that we'll talk about later.
Uh, if you have audio input and so on and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
Everything needs to be input as a sequence of numbers
NOTE CONF
x1 to xn.
And then each of these inputs is associated with a
NOTE CONF
weight.
As I said these are representing the synapses.
NOTE CONF
And the weight basically dictates how important that part of
the input is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The weights again can be real numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then here in the quote unquote cell body.
You have an output function.
NOTE CONF
And this is what this little sigma is supposed to
represent.
NOTE CONF
So the output function for us is sorry input from
the input function.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
The input function is just a weighted sum.
NOTE CONF
So we call this function mu.
It applies to x.
NOTE CONF
So these are all the x's here in the input.
And it just computes computes the weighted sum.
NOTE CONF
So that is the product of y and x I.
So a given input and a given weight summed over
NOTE CONF
all the inputs.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
So we're just assuming that all the inputs get added
up.
NOTE CONF
And then we decide whether to fire whether to produce
an output or not using an activation function.
NOTE CONF
So activation function which I'm writing as f here applies
to the input function.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So this is our input function.
NOTE CONF
And this is the activation function applies to the Uh,
to the result of the input function.
NOTE CONF
And then in this case, it just returns a one.
If the input is bigger than a threshold theta or
NOTE CONF
zero in all other cases.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So this is just a simple threshold function.
Step function.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you draw it.
NOTE CONF
And of course in this room there is no whiteboard.
If you draw it it just looks like this right.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see other functions later on in the next
lecture actually.
NOTE CONF
But here we just assume you take the inputs, you
sum them all up.
NOTE CONF
If you reach a certain threshold then you produce an
output.
NOTE CONF
If they don't reach the threshold then you stay at
zero.
NOTE CONF
You basically produce no output okay.
So this is super simple and not very powerful computationally
NOTE CONF
on its own.
But if you combine lots of these units, then you
NOTE CONF
can actually, um, you can Do everything that neural networks
can do.
NOTE CONF
So everything from ChatGPT to machine translation, image recognition, speech
to text and so on.
NOTE CONF
This is the technology essentially behind all of these, behind
all of these applications.
NOTE CONF
Organised in slightly more complicated ways.
But the underlying idea is the same.
NOTE CONF
Even the learning algorithm that we'll learn, that we'll talk
about tomorrow is the same for modern neural networks.
NOTE CONF
Okay, great.
So, uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
And here the activation, the output is very simple.
It's just zero one.
NOTE CONF
You can of course define another function here.
You could generate a negative output if you're below the
NOTE CONF
threshold and so on.
This is completely up to the to the design of
NOTE CONF
the of the network inputs.
As I've already mentioned in the here, we're assuming that
NOTE CONF
in the in the range zero and one.
So we're assuming a super simple case where everything is
NOTE CONF
binary.
All the inputs are binary, the outputs are binary.
NOTE CONF
The weights can be an arbitrary real number.
But just to make things easier and also to be
NOTE CONF
able to compute some simple examples, I'm just assuming that
the inputs are ones and zeros and the outputs are
NOTE CONF
ones and zeros.
This is not a necessary assumption.
NOTE CONF
We don't have to make that assumption.
It's just for simplicity.
NOTE CONF
Now okay.
So what can we do with this.
NOTE CONF
So let's actually work through a simple example.
This is our perceptron.
NOTE CONF
Same as here I'm assuming we only have two inputs.
And each of them have a weight of 0.5.
NOTE CONF
And we have a threshold of one.
And now we want to show that this perceptron can
NOTE CONF
compute simple logical functions.
So logical functions in computer science are functions that take
NOTE CONF
two inputs.
The inputs are binary and the output is binary.
NOTE CONF
So and for example, is a function that returns true,
or one if both of the inputs are true, or
NOTE CONF
one or is a function that returns true if one
of the inputs is true, and so on.
NOTE CONF
So any programming language will have these functions.
So here this is our function table for the and
NOTE CONF
we have two inputs and zero and zero output is
zero zero and one output is also zero one and
NOTE CONF
zero zero.
And one and one output is one right.
NOTE CONF
So this function returns a one if and only the
inputs are both one.
NOTE CONF
Very simple logical function.
And it would be really cute to be able to
NOTE CONF
show that this perceptron that we've just introduced is able
to model this function.
NOTE CONF
So let's see if that's the case.
And obviously I have given you the weights and I've
NOTE CONF
given you the threshold.
It's a very interesting question of how we get the
NOTE CONF
threshold and the weights.
And this is something we'll come to in the second
NOTE CONF
half of the of the lecture.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if our input is bigger than the threshold and
return one, otherwise we return zero.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume the input is one zero and one.
Just like here zero and 1 or 1 and zero.
NOTE CONF
The order doesn't really matter.
So now we need to get an output of zero.
NOTE CONF
We apply our little equation here right.
We compute the weighted sum of the inputs.
NOTE CONF
So that means zero times 0.51 times 0.5.
Sum this up is 0.5.
NOTE CONF
We check against the threshold.
Threshold is one so it's below the threshold.
NOTE CONF
So the output is zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's good because it means that we've got these
two lines right.
NOTE CONF
Let's try the other case.
Input is one and one right here at both inputs.
NOTE CONF
Now we have this case.
We would like to get a one as an output.
NOTE CONF
So it's 1.0.5 plus 1.0.5 is one.
And if it's bigger or equal to the threshold threshold
NOTE CONF
is one.
Then we output a one.
NOTE CONF
So we get this right as well the zero.
You can easily verify yourself that the sum will be
NOTE CONF
zero, and then the output will be zero as well.
So here the output is one.
NOTE CONF
And I'm not going through the zero case.
So.
NOTE CONF
Here I've set up the perceptron so that it computes
the logical function.
NOTE CONF
And for us right it I assume everything is binary.
So these are all the possible inputs.
NOTE CONF
And these are the outputs.
And they correspond to the logical and.
NOTE CONF
Before I move on and I don't have any wool
club or anything but are there any questions anything that
NOTE CONF
people would like to ask at this point.
So far so good.
NOTE CONF
So this is obviously a toy example with just two
inputs and a simple logical function.
NOTE CONF
Everything binary and.
But it seems to work for and you can easily
NOTE CONF
show that it works for R as well, right?
The Or function is the same as as this one,
NOTE CONF
except that here's a one and here's a one, right?
Or is one if the input is zero 1 or
NOTE CONF
1 0 or 1 one.
And so maybe this is general enough so that I
NOTE CONF
can compute all logical functions.
If I remember correctly, there's eight logical functions okay.
NOTE CONF
Um what do people think?
What about a function like XOR?
NOTE CONF
XOR is the exclusive or.
So that's this function here.
NOTE CONF
Where it is one only if one of the inputs
is one.
NOTE CONF
So this is either or right.
I'll go either to the theatre or to the cinema,
NOTE CONF
not both.
This is this logical function exclusive or do you think
NOTE CONF
we can model that too?
It should be easy, right?
NOTE CONF
Same architecture.
Maybe we need to change the weights of the threshold.
NOTE CONF
Turns out it's not possible with a perceptron.
And we'll look at the example here.
NOTE CONF
So here assuming weights of 0.5 and also a threshold
of 0.5.
NOTE CONF
And then if the input is 1 or 0.
Our weighted sum is 0.5.
NOTE CONF
So that means the output would be one.
Great.
NOTE CONF
If the inputs are zeros then obviously the weighted sum
is zero and the output is also zero.
NOTE CONF
So this case is also correct.
But if we have two ones then the weighted sum
NOTE CONF
is one.
And this is bigger than our threshold.
NOTE CONF
So the output is one whereas the correct output should
be zero.
NOTE CONF
And you can easily show that no matter how you
set your weights right.
NOTE CONF
You have the weights to play with here.
You could choose different weights or you could choose a
NOTE CONF
different threshold.
But no matter how you set those, you can never
NOTE CONF
get the XOR function.
And so when the perceptron was first invented, this caused
NOTE CONF
a bit of a crisis that people discovered that, you
know, no matter how you set the parameters, the weights
NOTE CONF
in the threshold, you cannot actually model even a simple
logical function like XOR.
NOTE CONF
Another question is why?
So let's think about that a little bit.
NOTE CONF
So this doesn't work and doesn't work either unfortunately.
So um with a bit more mathematics.
NOTE CONF
So people then went and analysed the perceptron and they
figured out that there is a class of functions that
NOTE CONF
the perceptron can learn.
And this is actually a fairly limited class of function
NOTE CONF
functions.
It's called the class of linearly separable functions.
NOTE CONF
So you can think about this like like follow like
the following.
NOTE CONF
So if you draw your data.
So here we have a very simple case of data.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We have four bits of input and the outputs associated
NOTE CONF
with that.
But in general you can have a lot more data.
NOTE CONF
And if we have two dimensions here dimension two and
dimensions one on the x and y axis.
NOTE CONF
And these correspond to our inputs right.
So in general this can be natural can be real
NOTE CONF
numbers.
It doesn't have to be binary.
NOTE CONF
And then we have the two possible outputs zeros and
ones which are here just circles and pluses.
NOTE CONF
And if these inputs and outputs they fall into little
clusters like this.
NOTE CONF
And you can draw a line between them.
Then the perceptron is able to model them.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't really matter whether the line is you
know it's A vertical line or diagonal like this, or
NOTE CONF
horizontal line.
If there's a line that separates the ones in the
NOTE CONF
and the zeros, or here the crosses and the and
the circles, then this is called linearly separable, right?
NOTE CONF
Because it's separable by a line.
And a perceptron can learn this can learn to put
NOTE CONF
the ones on in one category and the the zeros
in the other category.
NOTE CONF
In general, this would be a hyperplane rather than a
line, right?
NOTE CONF
In two dimensions it's a line.
In three dimensions it's a plane.
NOTE CONF
But of course you can have higher dimensions.
There's actually no limit to the dimension.
NOTE CONF
And this is then called a hyperplane.
Once it's three, 4 or 5 dimensions it becomes really
NOTE CONF
hard to visualise.
And these dimensions are the inputs.
NOTE CONF
Right here we have two inputs.
So it's two dimensional.
NOTE CONF
Corresponding to the the two lines here.
Dimension one.
NOTE CONF
Dimension one and dimension two.
But if there were three inputs, then the space would
NOTE CONF
be three dimensional.
The four inputs would be four dimensional, and so on.
NOTE CONF
And then you need a plane rather than just a
line.
NOTE CONF
But the same the same thing applies.
If you can fit this plane, you can find this
NOTE CONF
plane to separate the two classes.
Then you can model it with a perceptron.
NOTE CONF
And so why is this not possible with with XOR?
XOR is so simple.
NOTE CONF
Anyone have an idea?
Cannot separate the points by a line.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I don't know.
Is it like there's no way to differentiate if the
NOTE CONF
when it's above the activation function, like there's no it's
differentiating with both or just not.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That is roughly the intuition you need.
NOTE CONF
Another way of putting it you need a more complicated
thing than a line.
NOTE CONF
You need multiple lines, or you need a curve or
something like that.
NOTE CONF
So and we see this here, right?
If we plot our XOR right.
NOTE CONF
These are the two inputs x1 and x2 corresponding to
the two dimensions here dimension one and dimension two.
NOTE CONF
And then this is zero.
Zero has an output of zero one.
NOTE CONF
One has an output of zero as well.
101 and one zero have an output of one, right.
NOTE CONF
This is just how the function is defined that we're
trying to model.
NOTE CONF
And then of course you can easily see that this
forms a cluster right.
NOTE CONF
Those two points.
But these two points you cannot really draw a cluster.
NOTE CONF
I mean you could draw a complicated cluster like this
like a U-shaped, but then you need more than one
NOTE CONF
line to separate it.
Or alternatively you draw a line here and a line
NOTE CONF
here, but you can't draw a single line that has
these points on one side and those points on the
NOTE CONF
other side.
That is the intuition, right?
NOTE CONF
So this is basically the simplest possible function that has
this property.
NOTE CONF
And so it's the simplest function where we cannot take
these two points zero zero and one one and zero
NOTE CONF
one and one zero and separate them by a line.
Right.
NOTE CONF
For and we only need to separate this from those
three.
NOTE CONF
And we draw the line here.
So that would be really easy.
NOTE CONF
For all.
The we have one class that takes all these three
NOTE CONF
because they're all one.
And one is this one is zero.
NOTE CONF
So we draw the line here and so on.
So for the other logical functions it's possible the linearly
NOTE CONF
separable.
So you can draw the line to separate the two
NOTE CONF
classes.
And what?
NOTE CONF
This is really the only thing the perceptron can do.
It can.
NOTE CONF
It can classify two classes or teaser part two classes
if they can be separated by a line.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Which is perhaps not super surprising because everything here is
NOTE CONF
linear.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Let's go back to our definition.
This is just a weighted sum.
NOTE CONF
It's linear.
This is just a step function that's linear.
NOTE CONF
So we cannot get any curves or anything complicated out
of this model.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So and now let's let's think a little bit how
NOTE CONF
we could potentially fix this before we talk about learning.
Um, if we're um, if we have this simple linear
NOTE CONF
setup and we are making all these assumptions that it's
a linear sum, that is a threshold function that the
NOTE CONF
inputs and outputs are binary.
Which of these assumptions do we need to change?
NOTE CONF
You think to overcome this problem that we can only
model linearly separable functions?
NOTE CONF
Maybe more complicated activation function.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We could have, I don't know, a tangent or a
sine function or a quadratic function.
NOTE CONF
Turns out that doesn't make a difference.
It doesn't make the model more powerful.
NOTE CONF
It makes it more elegant in certain ways, but it
doesn't actually allow us to model anything we can't model.
NOTE CONF
We can model now.
What about allowing the inputs to be real numbers and
NOTE CONF
the outputs to be real numbers, rather than just binary
numbers?
NOTE CONF
Also doesn't make a difference.
What about we use lots of different, uh, lots of
NOTE CONF
these, um, simple units, and we network them together.
Does that make a difference?
NOTE CONF
Does that make them more powerful?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Why?
What's the intuition?
NOTE CONF
Very, very simple intuition.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You could just separate them into two groups and then
separate the two groups again.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Or more generally, you can model a curve.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So instead of just having to rely, rely on a
NOTE CONF
line to separate the two categories, multiple units give you
a curve that is basically made up of lots of
NOTE CONF
little lines.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you can approximate a more complicated function.
Each of the units models one segment of that as
NOTE CONF
a line.
So the more units you have, the smoother your your
NOTE CONF
curve becomes.
And you can you can model quite complicated decision surfaces.
NOTE CONF
Then these are then called decision services.
What is a line or a hyperplane in a simple
NOTE CONF
model?
There's a there's another trick though.
NOTE CONF
You need to, uh you need to, um, you need
to have a certain configuration of your neurones.
NOTE CONF
Right?
If you just have one neurone next to the other.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the input is, is a is a layer of
NOTE CONF
lots of different neurones.
That's not enough.
NOTE CONF
If you have two layers, that's also not enough.
You need what's called a hidden layer.
NOTE CONF
And once you have a hidden layer so you have
an input layer, an output layer and a hidden layer
NOTE CONF
in between.
So at least three layers in your network, then you
NOTE CONF
actually have the the maximum possible power.
In fact, you can show with a setup like this.
NOTE CONF
You can approximate arbitrary functions right.
So you have an arbitrary you have a universal function
NOTE CONF
approximator once you do that, but with a single layer.
And no matter how complicated you make the units, you're
NOTE CONF
not able to do it.
But we'll come to that next week.
NOTE CONF
Uh, before we do that, um, let's talk about learning,
right?
NOTE CONF
So, so far, I have just sort of conjured up
these weights here.
NOTE CONF
And the threshold.
In the general case, of course, we would like to
NOTE CONF
not do that, in particular in a large network.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Where we might have tens, hundreds, thousands of neurones.
If you've been following the literature on large language models.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Contemporary models, they have 200 billion parameters.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that's 200 billion of these weights.
NOTE CONF
No way we can guess those manually.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So we need a way of learning them of throwing
data at the model and inferring these parameters.
NOTE CONF
And that's what we're going to look at next.
And again to keep things simple we'll just do this
NOTE CONF
for the perceptron.
And then tomorrow we'll talk about the general case.
NOTE CONF
And now I just need to check my time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Ten minutes.
So we're unfortunately not going to manage to finish this
NOTE CONF
today, but, uh, we'll continue on Friday.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So choosing these weights and thresholds, which we have just
made up here, that is in general not easy.
NOTE CONF
We want to learn them from examples, right from training
examples where we know the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
And we use that to set our weights.
And then on new examples that we haven't seen before.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully we'll also get the correct answer.
So we need a learning algorithm.
NOTE CONF
And here's a YouTube video that illustrates it.
Um if you want to look at that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so before we get there, here's a simple trick.
Um, we said we need to learn the weights here
NOTE CONF
w and the threshold.
The threshold is kind of inconvenient because it's a special
NOTE CONF
case.
So what we can do.
NOTE CONF
We can just turn it into a wait.
So let's assume here we have another input.
NOTE CONF
The input always has minus one, the value minus one.
And the weight is our threshold theta.
NOTE CONF
And so we just treat this as another input.
And then our our activation function becomes just one.
NOTE CONF
If the input is bigger than zero and zero otherwise.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we don't have anything to adjust here in the
activation function.
NOTE CONF
And instead we are adjusting this weight.
Theta which is one of our behaves in the same
NOTE CONF
way as our normal weights.
So that's just a trick to say from now on
NOTE CONF
I will not talk about theta anymore basically, but it's
completely equivalent these two ways of doing things.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let's try to think what's happening before we
try to think what a good learning algorithm would be.
NOTE CONF
So we want to learn from from examples, right.
Just like here we had all these examples.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume we have a set of of examples like
this.
NOTE CONF
And we want to adjust our weights based on those
examples.
NOTE CONF
So in the general case here let's assume we have
four inputs.
NOTE CONF
So our inputs look like this.
Sequences of four zeros and ones.
NOTE CONF
We're still assuming the input is binary.
Let's assume we have six exemplars or training items or
NOTE CONF
training examples like that.
And we also know what the output is right.
NOTE CONF
For this input the output is one for that input
the output is zero and so on.
NOTE CONF
So this is a supervised learning algorithm right.
That means we know the correct answer for our training
NOTE CONF
data.
Later on we can test it on new examples where
NOTE CONF
we don't know the answer.
But for training we assume that we know the answer.
NOTE CONF
And um, but we don't know the weights or the
threshold.
NOTE CONF
Right?
That's what we're trying to adjust.
NOTE CONF
So how about we compute the output of the network,
right.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume we initialise our weights in some way.
We can set them all to zero.
NOTE CONF
We can set them to random values.
But let's assume we have weights.
NOTE CONF
And then we can compute the output right.
Using the formula that we have started with.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Here using our activation function our input function and our
NOTE CONF
activation function.
So we compute the output.
NOTE CONF
So we get a output which will not be very
good if we assume random weights to start with.
NOTE CONF
But what we can do we can compare this output
to the correct output.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Remember for our training examples we know the target.
NOTE CONF
We know the correct output.
So here this is wrong.
NOTE CONF
This one is right.
So by chance let's say this one is wrong.
NOTE CONF
This one is wrong.
This one is right again.
NOTE CONF
And now it would be very handy if we had
a way of changing our weights so that the target
NOTE CONF
becomes more like the output becomes more like the target.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is what we're going to do.
So for each of these examples we're going to change
NOTE CONF
our weights so that the output with the current weights
becomes more like the target t for this particular example.
NOTE CONF
And this is called the perceptron learning rule.
And it's only slightly more complicated than what I've said.
NOTE CONF
So we adjust the weights so that oh this is
the output for the current weights.
NOTE CONF
Moves closer to T, the target, the desired or correct
output.
NOTE CONF
And for a weight w we adjust it.
So this little arrow means update the weights to the
NOTE CONF
from the previous value plus a difference delta w I
okay.
NOTE CONF
And so how do we compute this difference.
Delta we we take the difference between the target and
NOTE CONF
the output and multiply it by a constant called eta
and by the input at that point she.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so the intuition is if this difference is big,
then our delta will be big.
NOTE CONF
If this difference is small or maybe zero, then our
delta will be zero, right?
NOTE CONF
If the target is the same as the output, like
in this lucky case, for example, then we don't need
NOTE CONF
to do an update, right?
Everything is fine.
NOTE CONF
We can move on to the next example.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And then what are the other parts.
So here the difference this is the really the important
NOTE CONF
bit.
But the ETA is what's called the learning rate.
NOTE CONF
This is a constant that you set.
And it tells you basically how fast you change the
NOTE CONF
weights, how fast you learn.
This is the ETA.
NOTE CONF
And then why is there the she.
What do people think?
NOTE CONF
Why does it make sense to also multiply by x
I x I is the input right at this point.
NOTE CONF
Right here it's all binary and but intuitively, if the
input is very big, then we also want to make
NOTE CONF
a big change because the the difference here right is
caused by the input of course.
NOTE CONF
And if the input is big then there will be
a bigger difference.
NOTE CONF
So we also need to reduce or increase the weight
more.
NOTE CONF
And as we'll see tomorrow, this has to do with
how the error function is defined for the perceptron in
NOTE CONF
the general case.
But here we just assume that for big inputs we
NOTE CONF
want to make big changes.
For small inputs we want to make small changes okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's it.
That's that's really that's all the that's the magic sauce.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's look at an example and I hope I
still have time.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
This room doesn't have internet.
NOTE CONF
Doesn't have a clock either.
Let's go through this example and then, uh, I'll stop
NOTE CONF
for today and we'll continue tomorrow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is our learning rule.
It's the same rule from here.
NOTE CONF
Um, our update for we we take the current Y
and add a delta y.
NOTE CONF
And this delta y is the difference between the target
and the output times the input and times the learning
NOTE CONF
rate.
Let's assume the output is one and the target is
NOTE CONF
one.
And in the second case the output is zero and
NOTE CONF
the target is one.
So here first case what should happen.
NOTE CONF
What do people think output is one.
Target is one.
NOTE CONF
Nothing should happen.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So let's see if that pans out.
So t minus always one minus one.
NOTE CONF
So that is zero of course.
So the whole term becomes zero.
NOTE CONF
We don't care about eta and x I output the
delta zero.
NOTE CONF
So the update is no update.
That means this example is correct.
NOTE CONF
We don't want to change the weights here.
Of course it's incorrect.
NOTE CONF
The output is zero and the target is one.
So we take target minus output.
NOTE CONF
That's one.
And then we multiply with eta and with x.
NOTE CONF
So this is one.
So the delta will be eta x.
NOTE CONF
So depending on the learning rate let's say the learning
rate is 0.1 and the input is one.
NOTE CONF
Then this would be a change of 0.50.1 okay.
And then um yeah.
NOTE CONF
So learning rate ETA is always positive and controls how
big the changes are.
NOTE CONF
And if the input is zero and the weight is
bigger than zero and the weight is bigger than zero,
NOTE CONF
then we increase the weight so that w times x
becomes larger than theta right.
NOTE CONF
Remember we're trying to generate an output.
If they're smaller than zero both of them.
NOTE CONF
Then we reduce the weight.
So we have assumed binary inputs.
NOTE CONF
So x can't be smaller than zero.
But the weight can be smaller than zero.
NOTE CONF
And so the weight reduces.
If they're both zero then sorry.
NOTE CONF
If yeah if they're both zero then the output will
be zero as well.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so that's really it.
NOTE CONF
And we just do this lots and lots of times
right.
NOTE CONF
So we do this for all our examples.
So here we do this for all the six examples.
NOTE CONF
Update our weights and then we do it again.
And we get more weight updates.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because we only make small changes.
NOTE CONF
ETA is often a very small number 0.10.01 and so
on.
NOTE CONF
So we only make small changes to the weight each
time.
NOTE CONF
And we do this again and again.
Each pass through our set of examples is called an
NOTE CONF
epoch.
So we do lots and lots of epochs until there's
NOTE CONF
no more changes.
Then we stop.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
When the weights stop changing, then we can't learn anything
NOTE CONF
anymore.
And hopefully we've learned the target function and we stop.
NOTE CONF
And you will get an opportunity to work through this
in the tutorial next week.
NOTE CONF
Actually, I'm out of time, but are there any quick
questions?
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
How is the learning rate assignment?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No it's a good question.
NOTE CONF
So the learning rate I didn't say anything about the
learning rate.
NOTE CONF
It's actually pretty complicated to decide the learning rate.
And people often use variable learning rates.
NOTE CONF
So you use a high learning rate at the beginning
of for the first few epochs.
NOTE CONF
And then you reduce it later on.
There's whole schedules that you use and so on.
NOTE CONF
You want to use something fairly small in relation to
your weights and your inputs.
NOTE CONF
So something like 0.5 for this or maybe even 0.1
for simple examples like this.
NOTE CONF
But yeah, it's basically empirically determined.
There isn't any maths behind it.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's all we have time for.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF